In this lecture, I will take
a data driven approach
to cryptocurrency.
First, we'll look at
basic price patterns.
Then, I'm going to define
the return to
investing in crypto.
Will ask, what is
the average return to
investing in crypto?
Then, what are the risks?
First, let's look at
a chart of the dollar to
Bitcoin exchange rate basically
starting back from 2014.
The orange line shows
how the price of
one Bitcoin varies
in terms of dollars.
The blue line shows the volume,
the transaction
volume in Bitcoin.
So what we can see
from this chart is
that Bitcoin has obviously
increased substantially
since its very beginning.
We can see the rise
of the end of 2017,
beginning of 2018 and
the subsequent crash
at the start of 2018.
But we also see that Bitcoin
has stabilized.
So at the time of this recording,
it's $4,000 to one Bitcoin.
Notice how the price of
Bitcoin tracks the
volume pretty closely.
You can also look
at the number of
active addresses of
Bitcoin which is
some measure of how it's used.
What's interesting about
active addresses is that
they in some ways actually
predict the price of Bitcoin.
So active addresses
started to go up
way before the price
of bitcoin went up.
This is an interesting fact that
perhaps could be used
in evaluation model.
So here's the same
charts for Ether.
So we see that Ether
also experienced a
run-up then a crash and it
has subsequently stabilized.
We also find the value of
the transactions in Ether
have continued to increase.
Here's Ether along with
its active addresses.
We see that active addresses
and Ether seemed to be going
down but they're still far
above what they used to be.
This act of address measure
is useful because it
tells us something
about the number of
people who are using the coin.
Once somebody has established
an active address,
we might argue that they're
likely to stay with it,
at least some of them.
Now, here's Ripple.
Ripple is even more dramatic in
terms of an enormous
run-up then a crash.
We also see that the volume in
Ripple and the active addresses
in Ripple have
however stabilized.
Here's a graph of
the log of the prices.
This is nice because we
can see all the prices
together on one graph if we
put them in a log scale.
What that does is it
shrinks the outliers.
So we can see that
the currencies all,
more or less rose
together with Ethereum,
I mean Ether, Ethereum
being the platform,
with Ether and Ripple
leading Bitcoin which
was interesting.
Then, they sold off together
but they did stabilize.
We're going to talk about
this incredible price increase
in Ripple later in this lecture.
So just to summarize,
from these simple plots,
we see that currency prices have
stabilized at the time
of this recording,
following the crash
from early 2018.
We see that prices track volume
and that they also
track active addresses.
We see that active addresses
appear to have
stabilized which is
something we might expect.
We see that currency
prices for these three are
very high relative
to where they began.
However, we also know that
many cryptocurrencies
have failed.
Now, cryptocurrency is
a store of value and as such,
we can think of it as an asset.
So we're going to
refer to the price of
Bitcoin as the number of dollars
it takes to buy one Bitcoin.
So the price of Bitcoin
right now is about 4,000.
So now let's consider
the returns to
the following strategy.
Purchase one Bitcoin today,
tomorrow exchange
that Bitcoin for dollars.
We're going to ask, what is
the return on this strategy?
Off course, this strategy will
entail transaction costs
if taken literally.
So perhaps it was better to think
about what you would
get if you would sell,
but it's perhaps best not
to trade cryptocurrency
on a daily basis unless one has
a very efficient platform
with which to do it.
So what are these
returns look like?
So let's just get
some notation clear.
With $1, you can purchase
one divided by Pt
units of Bitcoin
where Pt is the price of Bitcoin
today at time t. That's
what the t subscript means.
So wait, why? Let's
just be clear.
With Pt, you can purchase
Pt times 1 over Pt
units of Bitcoin.
So with Pt, you can purchase
one unit of Bitcoin.
So let's go back.
With $1, you purchase 1
over Pt units of Bitcoin.
So let's say you do this.
Now, you wake up tomorrow,
you look at Coinbase,
how much is the Bitcoin worth?
In your account a 1 over
Pt units of Bitcoin.
Each are worth Pt plus 1.
That's the price today,
one day after you purchase them.
So the daily return,
using the Bitcoin symbol,
is Pt plus 1 divided by Pt minus
1 or the percent change in price.
That's the definition of return
on the Bitcoin strategy.
So it's the growth rate
of your investment.
For example, if the price
of Bitcoin went up
by three percent,
which would be
an incredible daily return,
we can plug in three percent.
So Pt plus 1 over Pt is 1.03.
That means the return is 0.03.
Now, we can repeat this exercise
with any of the cryptocurrencies.
So this is our
definition of return.
It's the rate of growth in
your investment measured
in terms of dollars.
Now, let's ask, what is
the daily return over the sample
for each cryptocurrency?
Well, here are the answers.
For Bitcoin, the average return
per day is 0.254 percent.
That means on average,
$1 invested in Bitcoin
became 1.0254.
For Ether, it's 0.584 percent,
and for Ripple,
it's 0.514 percent.
Now, here's an important piece
of information to
keep in mind when you
think about those returns.
What I reported are statistical
averages known as means.
How are they calculated?
What I did was I summed up
the daily returns and divided
by the length of the sample.
So that's what
statistics tells us is
the best measure of
what you can expect.
However, what's very interesting
about cryptocurrency is
your returns on
a day-to-day basis
might look very different.
So what your returns on
a day-to-day basis look like,
that's best described by
the daily median return.
Now, in all cases,
the median return lies well
below the mean return.
So for Bitcoin,
it's 0.183 percent.
For Ether, it's
minus 0.092 percent,
way below the mean return.
For Ripple, it's
even further below
the mean return, minus 0.278.
What that means is
that on most days,
you would have lost money
on Ether and Ripple.
Now, in technical terms,
when the median lies
below the mean,
what it means is that
cryptocurrency returns
are positively skewed.
Most of the time you lose
money or you don't
make much money,
but you make it up on
some really big outliers.
Let's for example take
the return distribution
for Ripple.
Notice, so what
I've shown here is
a histogram and notice
that I've had to
break the histogram at
the middle and report in
two different scales
because there's
some really wild
returns on Ripple.
Here's another graph that shows
you what these wild
returns look like.
So what this histogram
shows is only the tail.
So what you see in the picture,
the little picture, is
the full distribution.
What this reveals
is that there was
a day in Ripple where you
more than doubled your money,
you earned a return of
160 percent in a single day.
Now, if a return is normally
distributed, volatility
measures risk.
For example, returns on
Ripple have a
standard deviation of
8.78 percent per day and a mean
of 0.52 percent per day.
So if Ripple returns were
normally distributed,
95 percent of the returns
would fall between
two standard deviations
above and below the mean.
Namely, if you compute
the two standard deviations,
18 percent and minus 17 percent.
Now, that's a huge amount
of daily volatility.
However, the normal
distribution does
not describe Ripple very well.
So here's the histogram with
a normal distribution
plotted in front of it.
We see that actually
most of the time
Ripple returns lie well within
the normal distribution,
which is to say that
that daily volatility is
a little bit misleading.
In fact, your volatility
is lower than that
most of the time.
However, we compute
such a high daily volatility
because of the outliers.
So you can see that the red line,
which corresponds to
the normal distribution,
completely leaves out both the
negative and the
positive outliers for Ripple.
A normal distribution
should say that
a return of 160 percent,
well technically possible, should
never occur in the entire
history of the universe.
But in fact, they did happen.
So here's some caveats.
This discussion does not assume
transaction costs which
could be substantial.
So for example, a $10 purchase of
Bitcoin on Coinbase yields
about 850 worth of the coin,
one could probably easily
improve on that though.
Another caveat is
survivor bias because one way
around the transaction costs is
maybe don't transact
quite so frequently.
Now, to illustrate
a survivor bias,
let's think of
a really simple problem.
Let's take 100 coins and
flip each of them 10 times.
Here's a histogram that
describes the number of heads.
I just tried this
on the computer off
course and then just
computed one histogram.
If you did this a
second time, you might
get a slightly
different histogram.
Now, suppose I look only at
the number of heads
for the top three.
They are eight, eight, and 10.
Now, should I conclude
from looking at
the top three coins that
flipping a coin almost
always yields heads?
Of course not. It's
just an artifact.
I just decided to
pick the top three.
So one criticism is that
the focus on
three cryptocurrencies,
the three that have done well,
has the same problem.
So the prices of cryptocurrency,
to summarize, appear
to have stabilized.
Active addresses have grown,
and prices seem to
rise with them.
The top three cryptocurrencies
have positive mean returns,
but Ripple and Ether
have negative medians,
which means most days
you would lose money,
but there are positive outliers.
Finally, returns are
subject to survivor bias.
We really need to keep in
mind that we're looking at
the three survivors whereas
many coins have failed.
What this means is that
the returns are going
to be inflated,
though it's a little bit
unclear by how much.